1: What are they asking one another about?
2: About the momentous news,
3: over which they disagree.[1]
	[1] The pagans used to mock the teachings of the Quran (e.g., resurrection and judgment). They disagreed whether the Quran was magic, poetry, or fortune-telling. 
4: But no! They will come to know.
5: Again, no! They will come to know.
6: Have We not smoothed out the earth ˹like a bed˺,
7: and ˹made˺ the mountains as ˹its˺ pegs,[1]
	[1] Just like tent pegs and icebergs, mountains go deep below the surface, slowing tectonic movement.
8: and created you in pairs,
9: and made your sleep for rest,
10: and made the night as a cover,
11: and made the day for livelihood,
12: and built above you seven mighty ˹heavens˺,
13: and placed ˹in them˺ a shining lamp,
14: and sent down from rainclouds pouring water,
15: producing by it grain and ˹various˺ plants,
16: and dense orchards?
17: Indeed, the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision is an appointed time—
18: ˹it is˺ the Day the Trumpet will be blown, and you will ˹all˺ come forth in crowds.
19: The sky will be ˹split˺ open, becoming ˹many˺ gates,
20: and the mountains will be blown away, becoming ˹like˺ a mirage.
21: Indeed, Hell is lying in ambush
22: as a home for the transgressors,
23: where they will remain for ˹endless˺ ages.
24: There they will not taste any coolness or drink,
25: except boiling water and ˹oozing˺ pus—
26: a fitting reward.
27: For they never expected any reckoning,
28: and totally rejected Our signs.
29: And We have everything recorded precisely.
30: ˹So the deniers will be told,˺ “Taste ˹the punishment˺, for all you will get from Us is more torment.”
31: Indeed, the righteous will have salvation—
32: Gardens, vineyards,
33: and full-bosomed maidens of equal age,
34: and full cups ˹of pure wine˺,
35: never to hear any idle talk or lying therein—
36: a ˹fitting˺ reward as a generous gift from your Lord,
37: the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, the Most Compassionate. No one will dare speak to Him
38: on the Day the ˹holy˺ spirit[1] and the angels will stand in ranks. None will talk, except those granted permission by the Most Compassionate and whose words are true.
	[1] i.e., the angel Gabriel.
39: That Day is the ˹ultimate˺ truth. So let whoever wills take the path leading back to their Lord.
40: Indeed, We have warned you of an imminent punishment—the Day every person will see ˹the consequences of˺ what their hands have done, and the disbelievers will cry, “I wish I were dust.”[1]
	[1] In the Hereafter, Allah will judge between all of His creation including animals, which will eventually become dust. The wicked will wish that they too were turned into dust so they do not have to go to the Fire, as reported in an authentic narration collected by Al-Ḥakim.
